Implicit Resource Binding - document current DXC behavior (#193)
llvm/wg-hlsl: proposals/0000-implicit-resource-binding.md

When a resource is unused and it has an explicit binding, this binding is
ignored and its descriptor range is available for use by other resources.

In the following example the resources `B`, `C` and `s.D` are identified as
unused and optimized away. Resources `A` and `E` get the binding from descriptor
range originally assigned to `B`:

#### Example 5.1

```c++
struct S {
  RWBuffer<float> D;    
};

RWBuffer<float> A; // gets u0
RWBuffer<float> B[10] : register(u0);  // unused
RWBuffer<float> C : register(u2);      // unused
S s : register(u5);                    // unused
RWBuffer<float> E[5]; // gets u1

void foo() {
    B[2][0] = 1.0;
}

bool bar(int i) {
    return i > 10;
}

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main(uint3 gi : SV_GROUPID) {
  if (false) {
    C[0] = 1.0;
  }
  for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
    if (i > 6)
      s.D[0] = 1.0; // unreachable
    if (bar(i))
      foo();        // unreachable
    if (bar(gi.x))
      A[0] = E[2][i];
  }
}
```
https://godbolt.org/z/Mcabxq4jG

Based on resources identified as unused in the example above it is very likely
that DXC is assigning implicit bindings later in the compiler after codegen and
code optimizations.  

## Motivation

> We need to support implicit resource bindings in Clang as it is a fundamental

Reviewer: I will probably lose this argument, but I would challenge this statement. Implicit bindings are not allowed under certain scenarios, and make various tasks like GBV (gpu based validation) more difficult to debug as the implementation must be kept in the loop. Rather than being able to validate the root signature offline.

Yes, we can have a container that doesn't have a root signature, but, in the absence of one, the app needs to create one. If the app creates one, and they mismatch with one that's in a container, the PSO creation fails.

In my opinion, this is a shortcoming of DXC, not behavior we want to bring forward.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I follow the logic here. We can have implicit bindings and a root signature. We can also have no implicit bindings and have a runtime-provided root signature. For example this is completely valid:

```hlsl
cbuffer RootConstants {
  float4 C;
};

struct Input {
  float4 A;
  float4 B;
};

struct Output {
  float4 A;
};

StructuredBuffer<Input> In;
RWStructuredBuffer<Output> Out;

[RootSignature("CBV(b0), SRV(t0), UAV(u0)")]
[numthreads(1,1,1)]
void main(uint GI : SV_GroupIndex) {
  Out[GI].A = In[GI].A * In[GI].B * C;
}
```

Are you arguing that this should not be valid?

Reviewer 3: Before I started working on the compiler I'd never considered embedding a root signature in a shader and always constructed them in my C++ code.  As far as I was concerned, my C++ code was specifying the interface - the root signature - that the shaders I used had to comply with.  Although there are reasons that this workflow isn't the most efficient, I don't think we should prohibit it.

Reviewer 2: I think we're also talking about different things.

Whether or not a root signature is provided in the shader, and whether or not resources are assigned register values implicitly are completely different.

At the DXIL level you can't even tell if a shader's bindings are implicit or explicit. Consider for example this shader:
```
#if IMPLICIT
#define BINDING(val)
#else 
#define BINDING(val) : register(val)
#endif

RWBuffer<int4> Buf BINDING(u0);

[numthreads(1,1,1)]
void main() {
    Buf[0] += Buf[0];
}
```
[Compiler Explorer](https://godbolt.org/z/WKe5bes4o)

Whether you compile this with `-DIMPLICIT` or not, the output is identical.

Reviewer: I think I have to do some more reading as I'm confusing myself. Sorry, please disregard.

* Proposal: [NNNN](NNNN-implicit-resource-binding.md)
* Author(s): [Helena Kotas](https://github.com/hekota)
* Status: **Design In Progress**

## Introduction

HLSL Resources are runtime-bound data that are provided as input, output, or
both to shader programs. Resources need to be bound to the graphics or compute
pipeline for shaders to access them. In DirectX this is done via descriptors,
which are sometimes referred to as views, handles or registers.

Binding of resources to descriptors in HLSL is done via `register` annotation on
the resource variable declaration, such as:

```c++
RWBuffer<float4> Data : register(u2); 
```

DirectX has four types of descriptors/handles:
- `UAV` - unordered access view (read-write) - using `u` registers
- `SRV` - shader resource view (read-only) - using `t` registers
- `CBV` - constant buffer view (read-only) - using `b` registers
- `Sampler` - sampler (read-only) - using `s` registers

The `register` annotation specifies the first descriptor the resource is bound

>  to. For simple resources that is the only descriptor the resource needs. In

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
to. For simple resources that is the only descriptor the resource needs. In
```

 case of arrays the `register` specifies the start of the description range
 needed for the resource array. The dimensions of the array determine the size
 of the description range.

The annotation can also include virtual register space:

```c++
Texture2D<float4> Tx : register(t3, space1); 
```

_Note: See the HLSL Language specification section Resource Binding for more
details._

Specifying resource binding on a resource is not mandatory. If a binding is not
provided by the user, it is up to the compiler to assign a descriptor to such
resource. This is called _implicit resource binding_ and it is the focus of this
document.

## Current behavior in DXC

This section documents the implicit resource binding assignment in DXC. For
simplicty the examples below use the just the `u` registers and
`RWBuffer<float>` resource, but same binding assignment rules apply to other
register and resource types as well.

> ### Simple Resource Declarations
>  Resource without binding assignment that are declared directly at the global

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Simple Resource Declarations

Resource without binding assignment that are declared directly at the global
```

scope are processed in the order they appear in the source code. They are
assigned the first available register slot in `space0`. Unused resources are
optimized away and do not participate in the implicit binding assignment.

#### Example 1.1
```c++
RWBuffer<float> A : register(u0);
RWBuffer<float> B;                 // gets u1
RWBuffer<float> C: register(u2);   // unused
RWBuffer<float> D;                 // gets u2

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main() {
  A[0] = D[0] + B[0];
}
```
https://godbolt.org/z/sMs3c8j7T

If `C` is used then `D` gets assigned descriptor `u3`. 

However, if the resources are declared inside a `struct`, their binding seems be
assigned in the order they are referenced in the code, and not the order in
which they were declared:

#### Example 1.2
```c++
RWBuffer<float> A : register(u0);
RWBuffer<float> C: register(u2);   // unused

struct S {
  RWBuffer<float> B;                 // gets u2
  RWBuffer<float> D;                 // gets u1
} s;

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main() {
  A[0] = s.D[0] + s.B[0];
}
```
https://godbolt.org/z/6a1b7Kvz3

> The maximum value of the register slot and virtual space number is `UINT_MAX`

Reviewer 4: Just wanted to link here: https://github.com/llvm/wg-hlsl/blob/main/proposals/0002-root-signature-in-clang.md#all-the-values-should-be-legal. The register spaces do have some reserved values in the root signature. Maybe that is worth noting here?

Author: This is probably validated just on the root-signature side. The compiler allows it: https://godbolt.org/z/4bfWz3E6r

(max. value of 32-unsigned integer).

### Constant-size Resource Arrays

Constant-size resource arrays declared directly at the global scope are also
processed in the order they appear in the source code. They are assigned the
first range of available decriptors in `space0` that fits the array size
regardless of whether the individual resources in the array are used or not, as
long as at least one of the them is accessed.

> If none of the resources in the are used, the whole resource declaration is

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If a resource isn't used, the whole resource declaration is...
```

This seems wrong. Resource arrays should be bound to a continuous description
range and the range should be reflected in the `createHandleFromBinding`
arguments. It also makes the binding susceptible to change whenever the code
changes and is not something that can be relied upon. 

Array resources inside structs are also not allowed to use dynamic indexing. In
the following example DXC reports error when the resource array `B` is accessed
while the dynamic indexing of `A` with is fine.

#### Example 2.3

```c++
RWBuffer<float> A[10];

struct S {
  RWBuffer<float> B[10];
} s;

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main() {
  for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
    A[i][0] = 1.0;
    s.B[i][0] = 1.0; // error: Index for resource array inside cbuffer must be a literal expression
  }
}
```

### Unbound Resource Arrays

Unbound resource arrays are placed in `space0` after the highest explicitly
assigned descriptor, or after the highest implictly assigned descriptor so far,
whichever is greater. They take up the rest of the descriptor slots in `space0`.

#### Example 3.1

```c++
RWBuffer<float> A : register(u1);
RWBuffer<float> B[];     // gets u6 (unbounded range)
RWBuffer<float> C : register(u5);

> RWBuffer<float> D[3];    // gets u2 because it first between A and C but not before A

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
RWBuffer<float> D[3];    // gets u2 because it fits between A and C but not before A
```

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main() {
  A[0] = D[2][0] + C[0] + B[10][0];
}
```
https://godbolt.org/z/vbvfqjo8h

If there are resources declared after the unbound array that do not fit into the
remaining space available in `space0`, DXC reports an error. For example
increasing the dimension of array 'D' from 3 to 4 results in a `error: resource
D could not be allocated`.

#### Example 3.2
```c++
RWBuffer<float> A : register(u1);
RWBuffer<float> B[];     // gets u6 (unbounded range)
RWBuffer<float> C : register(u5);
RWBuffer<float> D[4];    // error - does not fit in the remaining descriptor ranges in space0 

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main() {
  A[0] = D[2][0] + C[0] + B[10][0];
}
```
https://godbolt.org/z/6bYoG599P

> It looks like DXC never attempts to assing descriptors from virtual register

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It looks like DXC never attempts to assigning descriptors from virtual register
```

space other than `space0`.

However, moving declaration of `D` before the unbounded array `B` compiles
successfully and `B` gets assigned descriptors from `u10` forward.

#### Example 3.3

```c++
RWBuffer<float> A : register(u1);
RWBuffer<float> D[4];    // gets u6
RWBuffer<float> B[];     // gets u10 (unbounded range)
RWBuffer<float> C : register(u5);

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main() {
  A[0] = D[2][0] + C[0] + B[10][0];
}
```
https://godbolt.org/z/cjP35n63d

> Since DXC seems to only assigns descriptors from `space0`, it reports error

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Since DXC seems to only assign descriptors from `space0`, it reports an error
```

whenever there are:
- two or more unbound resource arrays without explicit binding

> - one unboud resource array with explicit binding in `space0` and one or more

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- one unbound resource array with explicit binding in `space0` and one or more
```

resource. This is called _implicit resource binding_ and it is the focus of this
document.

## Current behavior in DXC

This section documents the implicit resource binding assignment in DXC. For
simplicty the examples below use the just the `u` registers and
`RWBuffer<float>` resource, but same binding assignment rules apply to other
register and resource types as well.

### Simple Resource Declarations

Resource without binding assignment that are declared directly at the global
scope are processed in the order they appear in the source code. They are
assigned the first available register slot in `space0`. Unused resources are
optimized away and do not participate in the implicit binding assignment.

#### Example 1.1
```c++
RWBuffer<float> A : register(u0);
RWBuffer<float> B;                 // gets u1
RWBuffer<float> C: register(u2);   // unused
RWBuffer<float> D;                 // gets u2

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main() {
  A[0] = D[0] + B[0];
}
```
https://godbolt.org/z/sMs3c8j7T

If `C` is used then `D` gets assigned descriptor `u3`. 

However, if the resources are declared inside a `struct`, their binding seems be

> assigned in the order they are referenced in the code, and not the order in

Reviewer 5: Maybe it's obvious that resources are never assigned to registers in a library shader and so we don't need to even mention that.

which they were declared:

#### Example 1.2
```c++
RWBuffer<float> A : register(u0);
RWBuffer<float> C: register(u2);   // unused

struct S {
  RWBuffer<float> B;                 // gets u2
  RWBuffer<float> D;                 // gets u1
} s;

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main() {

>   A[0] = s.D[0] + s.B[0];

Author: The resource accesses here are not function parameters, so that rule does not apply. I would guess that the evaluation order of binary expressions is guaranteed, but even if not, this way of assigning bindings is certainly not something that can be relied upon.

>   A[0] = s.D[0] + s.B[0];

Reviewer 5: Hm, would've thought addition was a function technically, but regardless your point that it's use dependent still stands.

(max. value of 32-unsigned integer).

### Constant-size Resource Arrays

Constant-size resource arrays declared directly at the global scope are also
processed in the order they appear in the source code. They are assigned the
first range of available decriptors in `space0` that fits the array size
regardless of whether the individual resources in the array are used or not, as
long as at least one of the them is accessed.

If a resource isn't used, the whole resource declaration is optimized away and
its descriptor range is available for use by other resources.

#### Example 2.1
```c++
RWBuffer<float> A : register(u2);
RWBuffer<float> B[4];    // gets u3 because it does not fit before A (range 4)
RWBuffer<float> C[2];    // gets u0 because it fits before A (range 2)
RWBuffer<float> D[50] : register(u6); // unused
RWBuffer<float> E[2];    // gets u7 which is right after B (range 4)

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main() {
  A[0] = E[2][0] + C[1][0] + B[1][0];
}
```
https://godbolt.org/z/qha84sjvT

However, if the resource array is defined in a `struct`, the binding seems to be
assigned to the individual array elements in the order they are used in the

> code. In other words, the array elements are treated as unrelated individual

Reviewer 5: If the substitution for the word `code` that I made in my comment above is true, you might want to replace `code` too.
And if you can determine whether this behavior is solid or not, you may want to remove `seems to be`.

resources:

#### Example 2.2
```c++
struct S {
    RWBuffer<float> B[4]; // s.B.2 gets u3
    RWBuffer<float> C[2]; // s.C.1 gets u1
    RWBuffer<float> E[2]; // s.E.2 gets u0
};                        // s.E.1 gets u4

RWBuffer<float> A : register(u2);
S s;

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main() {
  A[0] = s.E[2][0] + s.C[1][0] + s.B[3][0] + s.E[1][0];
}
```
https://godbolt.org/z/45j8aqTaf

> This seems wrong. Resource arrays should be bound to a continuous description

Author: I believe `continuous` is a better fit here as in "uninterrupted in sequence" :)

range and the range should be reflected in the `createHandleFromBinding`

> arguments. It also makes the binding susceptible to change whenever the code

Reviewer 5: If code changes, use-order may change, which may cause changes in register assignment. I don't think this is a good secondary argument for changing the register assignment behavior, because either way register assignments change when the code changes, right? Maybe I'm not understanding.

Author: There are two issues here:
1. the register assignment changes depending on use-order
2. the array is not bound to a continuous range of registers
Both are wrong, and we should fix that. Tex agreed that this is a bug in DXC.

changes and is not something that can be relied upon. 

Array resources inside structs are also not allowed to use dynamic indexing. In

> the following example DXC reports error when the resource array `B` is accessed

Reviewer 5: nit: Did you mean `DXC reports errors when the resource array B is accessed while the dynamic indexing of A is fine` ?

increasing the dimension of array 'D' from 3 to 4 results in a `error: resource
D could not be allocated`.

#### Example 3.2
```c++
RWBuffer<float> A : register(u1);
RWBuffer<float> B[];     // gets u6 (unbounded range)
RWBuffer<float> C : register(u5);
RWBuffer<float> D[4];    // error - does not fit in the remaining descriptor ranges in space0 

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main() {
  A[0] = D[2][0] + C[0] + B[10][0];
}
```
https://godbolt.org/z/6bYoG599P

It looks like DXC never attempts to assign descriptors from virtual register
space other than `space0`.

However, moving declaration of `D` before the unbounded array `B` compiles
successfully and `B` gets assigned descriptors from `u10` forward.

#### Example 3.3

```c++
RWBuffer<float> A : register(u1);
RWBuffer<float> D[4];    // gets u6
RWBuffer<float> B[];     // gets u10 (unbounded range)
RWBuffer<float> C : register(u5);

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main() {
  A[0] = D[2][0] + C[0] + B[10][0];
}
```
https://godbolt.org/z/cjP35n63d

Since DXC seems to only assign descriptors from `space0`, it reports an error
whenever there are:
- two or more unbound resource arrays without explicit binding

> - one unbound resource array with explicit binding in `space0` and one or more

Reviewer 5: Note: it also emits an error with 2 explicitly bound unbounded resource arrays.
So perhaps this could be simplified to:
`two or more unbounded resource arrays in the same register space.`

  unbound resource arrays without explicit binding

#### Example 3.4

```c++
RWBuffer<float> C[];  // gets u0 (unbounded range)
RWBuffer<float> D[];  // error

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main() {
  D[10][0] = C[20][2];
}
```
https://godbolt.org/z/od7o6xfWE

Unbound resource arrays cannot be placed inside structs and DXC reports `error:
array dimensions of struct/class members must be explicit`.

### Register spaces other than `space0`

Use of other virtual register spaces does not seem to affect the implicit
assignments in `space0`:

#### Example 4.1
```c++
....
RWBuffer<float> A : register(u0, space1); 
RWBuffer<float> B[10];   // gets u0 in space0 (range 10)
RWBuffer<float> C[5][4] : register(u10, space5);
RWBuffer<float> D;       // gets u10 in space0

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main() {
  A[0] = D[0] + C[3][3][0] + B[5][0];
}
```
https://godbolt.org/z/EeW17MncE

### Space-only register annotations

> DXC support binding annotations that only specify the register space from which the descriptor binding should be assigned.

Reviewer 5: nit: supports

### Unused resources

Unused resources are resources that are not referenced in the source code or
that are unreachable from the shader entry point function and later removed from
the final IR code by LLVM optimization passes.

When a resource is unused and it has an explicit binding, this binding is
ignored and its descriptor range is available for use by other resources.

In the following example the resources `B`, `C` and `s.D` are identified as
unused and optimized away. Resources `A` and `E` get the binding from descriptor
range originally assigned to `B`:

#### Example 6.1

```c++
struct S {
  RWBuffer<float> D;    
};

RWBuffer<float> A; // gets u0
RWBuffer<float> B[10] : register(u0);  // unused
RWBuffer<float> C : register(u2);      // unused
S s : register(u5);                    // unused
RWBuffer<float> E[5]; // gets u1

void foo() {
    B[2][0] = 1.0;
}

bool bar(int i) {
    return i > 10;
}

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main(uint3 gi : SV_GROUPID) {
  if (false) {
    C[0] = 1.0;
  }
  for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
    if (i > 6)
      s.D[0] = 1.0; // unreachable
    if (bar(i))
      foo();        // unreachable
    if (bar(gi.x))
      A[0] = E[2][i];
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 5: Could you add a newline after? Strange how the text is blue here.

Author: I am not sure what you mean. The blue link to compiler explorer?

Reviewer 5: All the text under the tick marks is blue, including the link, and `Based on resources ident...`
